across the years to our own time.
add vale when he signed a letter;
After a fine career, his father
always contented with his life,
a mild rebuke was his worst mark,
amusing, flattering with the best,
a nation's wealth is, what augments it,
and act the humble or imperious,
and bred upon the Neva's brink,
and glumly serves the medicine bottle,
and how a country lives, and why
and listen for the heart's first sound,
and never played a shrewder trick.
and never stir a foot away!
and now at last he saw the World.
and self-oblivion was his art!
and sighs, and asks oneself all through:
and telling trochee from iambic
and the majestic, antlered royal,
and then a stroll in Letny Park.
And the sly baseness, fit to throttle,
and took a mortgage on his land.
and with his dinner, and his wife.
as horses whirled him through the dust.
as was the old suspicious sage,
as well-read, though of pedant cast.
at first Madame gave him tuition,
But God, how deadly dull to sample
but groomed an anecdote-collection
but I'm allergic to the North...1
but when past joking he fell sick,
But when the hour of youthful passion
But you, blest husbands, to the end
by will of Zeus, the high and just,
condemned to a lifetime of hard,
(critical judges, strict as any)
deep in Moldavia the abhorred,
ended his wild career of fashion
Eugene as clever, and quite sweet.
Eugene was free, and as a dresser
Evgeny's total store of knowledge
far, far from Italy, his adored.
Fate saved Evgeny from perdition:
Faublas'3 disciple for an age --
felicitously every theme,
for raking up historic dust
for unmeant kindness - how he shone!
frenzy which wrecks our lives for sound,
Friends of my Ruslan and Lyudmila,
frightening with all despair's disguises,
from her Monsieur took on the child.
had only debts on which to live.
haphazard; so, to God be thanks,
He cursed Theocritus and Homer,
he'd pop the poison in his chalice!
He gave three balls a year, and rather
he had the talent of saluting
He lacked the slightest predilection
he really forced one to admire him --
here you were born as well, I think,
He was sweet-natured, and yet wild.
He was without that dithyrambic
his bow was wholly unaffected.
His father failed to understand
His hair was fashionably curled,
his young heyday's supreme employment,
how bold or bashful there, and here
how brilliant with its instant tear!
How early he'd learnt to dissemble,
How early on he learnt to trouble
How soft his glance, or at discretion
How well he donned new shapes and sizes --
how well he knew the way to hurt --
I have no leisure to recall;
impart such lessons as you please!
in Adam Smith was his diploma;
in casual letters of confession --
In French Onegin had perfected
In languid silence, or the flame
in the mazurka he was light,
it needs no gold if a supply
it's easy, without too much fooling,
its work, its torture, its enjoyment,
it was goodbye, Monsieur l'Abb&eacute;.
let me acquaint you on the nail
Let others learn from his example!
made London's dandy his professor.
make Juvenal his text, or better
Monsieur l'Abb&eacute;, the mediocre,
My uncle - high ideals inspire him;
No moralizing from this joker;
Now Latin's gone quite out of favour;
of eloquence, and just the same
of entertaining the half-dead:
of hope and gloom, romantic-fashion,
of jealousy, to seem to tremble
of kindling smiles in ladies' eyes.
of listening like a judge-supreme
of simple product supplements it.
Onegin knew enough to savour
Onegin, my good friend, was littered
Onegin was assessed by many
one smoothes the pillows down in bed,
one thing inspired his breath, his heart,
or pine, persuade of yes or no,
or stirring annalistic must;
or, with an epigram-surprise,
our deep economist had got
proficiency to speak and write,
promptly had nothing left to give.
pursue his love - and at one bound
reader, or where you've shone and glittered!
reluctant to exhaust the boy,
secure a secret assignation,
sickroom attendance night and day
stalking the momentary weakness,
startling the ingenuous with a jest,
struck for Evgeny, with its play
stumblingly call to mind he did
Such were a young rake's meditations --
swaying the artless, waiting on
that stretched from Romulus in his prime
the art he'd studied best of all,
the gift of recognizing what
the heart of the professional flirt!
the indifferent, or the deadly serious!
the legatee of his relations --
the meaning of an epigraph,
then afterwards, alone, at ease,
then he'd implore a declaration,
There once I too strolled back and forth:
the subtle spouse was just as loyal --
The World found this enough to treat
this was the science of that passion
throughout the boredom of the hours --
to hide a hope, to make a show
to pass for cultured in our ranks.
treated his lessons as a ploy.
two verses of the Aeneid.
Unforced, as conversation passed,
was quite beyond his wit, we found.
We all meandered through our schooling
what occupied his chafing powers
what traps he'd set him, with what malice
When out to burst a rival's bubble,
"When will the devil come for you?"''
where he was master of his college,
which Ovid sang, for which the bard,
while serious topics were disputing,
without preliminary feeler
with passion and with shrewd obliqueness
with this the hero of my tale:
yet, truthfully and not in chaff,
you kept your friendship with our friend: